Kathmandu Metropolitant City

Municipal Executive Office, Bagmati Province

Kathmandu: A brief introduction

Kathmandu (/ˌkætmænˈduː/; Nepali: काठमाडौँ, Nepali pronunciation: [ˈkaʈʰmaɳɖu]) is the capital and largest city of Nepal, 
with a population of around 1 million. Also known as the city of temples. The city stands at an elevation of approximately 
1,400 metres (4,600 feet) above sea level in the bowl-shaped Kathmandu Valley in central Nepal. The valley was historically 
called the "Nepal Mandala" and has been the home of the Newar people, a cosmopolitan urban civilization in the Himalayan 
foothills. The city was the royal capital of the Kingdom of Nepal and hosts palaces, mansions and gardens of the Nepalese 
aristocracy. It has been home to the headquarters of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) since 1985. 
Today, it is the seat of government of the Nepalese republic, established in 2008, and is part of the Bagmati Province.

Kathmandu is and has been for many years the centre of Nepal's history, art, culture, and economy. It has a multi-ethnic 
population within a Hindu and Buddhist majority. Religious and cultural festivities form a major part of the lives of people 
residing in Kathmandu. Tourism is an important part of the economy in the city. In 2013, Kathmandu was ranked third among the 
top ten upcoming travel destinations in the world by TripAdvisor, and ranked first in Asia. The city is considered the 
gateway to the Nepalese Himalayas and is home to several World Heritage Sites: the Durbar Square, Swayambhunath, Boudhanath 
and Pashupatinath. Kathmandu valley is growing at 4 percentage per year according to the World Bank in 2010, making it one 
of the fastest-growing metropolitan areas in South Asia, and the first region in Nepal to face the unprecedented challenges 
of rapid urbanization and modernization at a metropolitan scale.[3]

Etymology

The indigenous Newari term for Kathmandu valley is Yen. The Nepali name Kathmandu comes from Kasthamandap, which stood in the 
Durbar Square. In Sanskrit, Kāṣṭha (Sanskrit: काष्ठ) means "wood" and Maṇḍapa (Sanskrit: मण्डप) means "pavilion". This public 
pavilion, also known as Maru Satta in Newari, was rebuilt in 1596 by Biseth in the period of King Laxmi Narsingh Malla. The 
three-storey structure was made entirely of wood and used no iron nails nor supports. According to legends, all the timber 
used to build the pagoda was obtained from a single tree.[4] The structure collapsed during a major earthquake in April 2015.

The colophons of ancient manuscripts, dated as late as the 20th century, refer to Kathmandu as Kāṣṭhamaṇḍap Mahānagar in 
Nepal Mandala. Mahānagar means "great city". The city is called Kāṣṭhamaṇḍap in a vow that Buddhist priests still recite 
to this day. Thus, Kathmandu is also known as Kāṣṭhamaṇḍap. During medieval times, the city was sometimes called Kāntipur 
(Sanskrit: कान्तिपुर). This name is derived from two Sanskrit words – Kānti and Pur. Kānti is a word that stands for "beauty" 
and is mostly associated with light and Pur means place, thus giving it the meaning, "City of light".

Climate data for Kathmandu (1981-2010)

